<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
			<p>The first thing he saw when he opened the door of the room at the top of the house was the fire.</p>
			<p>A fire. He hadn’t ordered a fire. He must look into that. That officious slattern Lizzie⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>Then, before he had recovered from this, he had another shock. Lucy was on the hearthrug, her head leaning against the sofa, sound asleep.</p>
			<p>So that’s what she had been doing⁠—just going comfortably to sleep, while he⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>He shut the door and walked over to the fireplace and stood with his back to it looking down at her. Even his heavy tread didn’t wake her. He had shut the door in the way that was natural, and had walked across the room in the way that was natural, for he felt no impulse in the presence of sleep to go softly. Besides, why should she sleep in broad daylight? Wemyss was of opinion that the night was for that. No wonder she couldn’t steep at night if she did it in the daytime. There she was, sleeping soundly, completely indifferent to what he might be doing. Would a really loving woman be able to do that? Would a really devoted wife?</p>
			<p>Then he noticed that her face, the side of it he could see, was much swollen, and her nose was red. At least, he thought, she had had some contrition for what she had done before going to sleep. It was to be hoped she would wake up in a proper frame of mind. If so, even now some of the birthday might be saved.</p>
			<p>He took out his pipe and filled it slowly, his eyes wandering constantly to the figure on the floor. Fancy that thing having the power to make or mar his happiness. He could pick that much up with one hand. It looked like twelve, with its long-stockinged relaxed legs, and its round, short-haired head, and its swollen face of a child in a scrape. Make or mar. He lit his pipe, repeating the phrase to himself, struck by it, struck by the way it illuminated his position of bondage to love.</p>
			<p>All his life, he reflected, he had only asked to be allowed to lavish love, to make a wife happy. Look how he had loved Vera: with the utmost devotion till she had killed it, and nothing but trouble as a reward. Look how he loved that little thing on the floor. Passionately. And in return, the first thing she did on being brought into his home as his bride was to quarrel and ruin his birthday. She knew how keenly he had looked forward to his birthday, she knew how the arrangements of the whole honeymoon, how the very date of the wedding, had hinged on this one day; yet she had deliberately ruined it. And having ruined it, what did she care? Comes up here, if you please, and gets a book and goes comfortably to sleep over it in front of the fire.</p>
			<p>His mouth hardened still more. He pulled the arm-chair up and sat down noisily in it, his eyes cold with resentment.</p>
			<p>The book Lucy had been reading had dropped out of her hand when she fell asleep, and lay open on the floor at his feet. If she used books in such a way, Wemyss thought, he would be very careful how he let her have the key of his bookcase. This was one of Vera’s⁠—Vera hadn’t taken any care of her books either; she was always reading them. He slanted his head sideways to see the title, to see what it was Lucy had considered more worth her attention than her conduct that day towards her husband. <i epub:type="se:novel">Wuthering Heights</i>. He hadn’t read it, but he fancied he had heard of it as a morbid story. She might have been better employed, on their first day at home, than in shutting herself away from him reading a morbid story.</p>
			<p>It was while he was looking at her with these thoughts stonily in his eyes that Lucy, wakened by the smell of his pipe, opened hers. She saw Everard sitting close to her, and had one of those moments of instinctive happiness, of complete restoration to unshadowed contentment, which sometimes follow immediately on waking up, before there has been time to remember. It seems for a wonderful instant as though all in the world were well. Doubts have vanished. Pain is gone. And sometimes the moment continues even beyond remembrance.</p>
			<p>It did so now with Lucy. When she opened her eyes and saw Everard, she smiled at him a smile of perfect confidence. She had forgotten everything. She woke up after a deep sleep and saw him, her dear love, sitting beside her. How natural to be happy. Then, the expression on his face bringing back remembrance, it seemed to her in that first serene sanity, that clear-visioned moment of spirit unfretted by body, that they had been extraordinarily silly, taking everything the other one said and did with a tragicness.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Only love filled Lucy after the deep, restoring sleep. “Dearest one,” she murmured drowsily, smiling at him, without changing her position.</p>
			<p>He said nothing to that; and presently, having woken up more, she got on to her knees and pulled herself across to him and curled up at his feet, her head against his knee.</p>
			<p>He still said nothing. He waited. He would give her time. Her words had been familiar, but not penitent. They had hardly been the right beginning for an expression of contrition; but he would see what she said next.</p>
			<p>What she said next was, “Haven’t we been silly,”⁠—and, more familiarity, she put one arm round his knees and held them close against her face.</p>
			<p>“We?” said Wemyss. “Did you say we?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Lucy, her cheek against his knee. “We’ve been wasting time.”</p>
			<p>Wemyss paused before he made his comment on this. “Really,” he then said, “the way you include me shows very little appreciation of your conduct.”</p>
			<p>“Well, <em>I’ve</em> been silly then,” she said, lifting her head and smiling up at him.</p>
			<p>She simply couldn’t go on with indignations. Perhaps they were just ones. It didn’t matter if they were. Who wanted to be in the right in a dispute with one’s lover? Everybody, oh, but everybody who loved, would passionately want always to have been in the wrong, never, never to have been right. That one’s beloved should have been unkind⁠—who wanted that to be true? Who wouldn’t do anything sooner than have not been mistaken about it? Vividly she saw Everard as he was before their marriage; so dear, so boyish, such fun, her playmate. She could say anything to him then. She had been quite fearless. And vividly, too, she saw him as he was when first they met, both crushed by death⁠—how he had comforted her, how he had been everything that was wonderful and tender. All that had happened since, all that had happened on this particular and most unfortunate day, was only a sort of excess of boyishness: boyishness on its uncontrolled side, a wave, a fit of bad temper provoked by her not having held on to her impulses. That locking her out in the rain⁠—a schoolboy might have done that to another schoolboy. It meant nothing, except that he was angry. That about sexual allure⁠—⁠oh, well.</p>
			<p>“I’ve been very silly,” she said earnestly.</p>
			<p>He looked down at her in silence. He wanted more than that. That wasn’t nearly enough. He wanted much more of humbleness before he could bring himself to lift her on to his knee, forgiven. And how much he wanted her on his knee.</p>
			<p>“Do you realise what you’ve done?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Lucy. “And I’m so sorry. Won’t we kiss and be friends?”</p>
			<p>“Not yet, thank you. I must be sure first that you understand how deliberately wicked you’ve been.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but I haven’t been deliberately wicked!” exclaimed Lucy, opening her eyes wide with astonishment. “Everard, how can you say such a thing?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, I see. You are still quite impenitent, and I am sorry I came up.”</p>
			<p>He undid her arm from round his knees, put her on one side, and got out of the chair. Rage swept over him again.</p>
			<p>“Here I’ve been sitting watching you like a dog,” he said, towering over her, “like a faithful dog while you slept, waiting patiently till you woke up and only wanting to forgive you, and you not only callously sleep after having behaved outrageously and allowed yourself to exhibit temper before the whole house on our very first day together in my home⁠—well knowing, mind you, what day it is⁠—but when I ask you for some sign, some word, some assurance that you are ashamed of yourself and will not repeat your conduct, you merely deny that you have done anything needing forgiveness.”</p>
			<p>He knocked the ashes out of his pipe, his face twitching with anger, and wished to God he could knock the opposition out of Lucy as easily.</p>
			<p>She, on the floor, sat looking up at him, her mouth open. What could she do with Everard? She didn’t know. Love had no effect; saying she was sorry had no effect.</p>
			<p>She pushed her hair nervously behind her ears with both hands. “I’m sick of quarrels,” she said.</p>
			<p>“So am I,” said Wemyss, going towards the door thrusting his pipe into his pocket. “You’ve only got yourself to thank for them.”</p>
			<p>She didn’t protest. It seemed useless. She said, “Forgive me, Everard.”</p>
			<p>“Only if you apologise.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Yes what?” He paused for her answer.</p>
			<p>“I do apologise.”</p>
			<p>“You admit you’ve been deliberately wicked?”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes.”</p>
			<p>He continued towards the door.</p>
			<p>She scrambled to her feet and ran after him. “Please don’t go,” she begged, catching his arm. “You know I can’t bear it, I can’t bear it if we quarrel⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Then what do you mean by saying ‘Oh yes,’ in that insolent manner?”</p>
			<p>“Did it seem insolent? I didn’t mean⁠—oh, I’m so tired of this⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I daresay. You’ll be tireder still before you’ve done. <em>I</em> don’t get tired, let me tell you. You can go on as long as you choose⁠—it won’t affect me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh do, do let’s be friends. I don’t want to go on. I don’t want anything in the world except to be friends. Please kiss me, Everard, and say you forgive me⁠—”</p>
			<p>He at least stood still and looked at her.</p>
			<p>“And do believe I’m so, so sorry⁠—”</p>
			<p>He relented. He wanted, extraordinarily, to kiss her. “I’ll accept it if you assure me it is so,” he said.</p>
			<p>“And do, do let’s be happy. It’s your birthday⁠—”</p>
			<p>“As though I’ve forgotten that.”</p>
			<p>He looked at her upturned face; her arm was round his neck now. “Lucy, I don’t believe you understand my love for you,” he said solemnly.</p>
			<p>“No,” said Lucy truthfully, “I don’t think I do.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll have to learn.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Lucy; and sighed faintly.</p>
			<p>“You mustn’t wound such love.”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Lucy. “Don’t let us wound each other ever any more, darling Everard.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not talking of each other. I’m talking at this moment of myself in relation to you. One thing at a time, please.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Lucy. “Kiss me, won’t you, Everard? Else I shan’t know we’re really friends.”</p>
			<p>He took her head in his hands, and bestowed a solemn kiss of pardon on her brow.</p>
			<p>She tried to coax him back to cheerfulness. “Kiss my eyes too,” she said, smiling at him, “or they’ll feel neglected.”</p>
			<p>He kissed her eyes.</p>
			<p>“And now my mouth, please, Everard.”</p>
			<p>He kissed her mouth, and did at last smile.</p>
			<p>“And now won’t we go to the fire and be cosy?” she asked, her arm in his.</p>
			<p>“By the way, who ordered the fire?” he inquired in his ordinary voice.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. It was lit when I came up. Oughtn’t it to have been?”</p>
			<p>“Not without orders. It must have been that Lizzie. I’ll ring and find out⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t ring!” exclaimed Lucy, catching his hand⁠—she felt she couldn’t bear any more ringing. “If you do she’ll come, and I want us to be alone together.”</p>
			<p>“Well, whose fault is it we haven’t been alone together all this time?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but we’re friends now⁠—you mustn’t go back to that any more,” she said, anxiously smiling and drawing his hand through her arm.</p>
			<p>He allowed her to lead him to the arm-chair, and sitting in it did at last feel justified in taking her on his knee.</p>
			<p>“How my own Love spoils things,” he said, shaking his head at her with fond solemnity when they were settled in the chair.</p>
			<p>And Lucy, very cautious now, only said gently, “But I never <em>mean</em> to.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
