<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>I</h2>
			<p>When the doctor had gone, and the two women from the village he had been waiting for were upstairs shut in with her dead father, Lucy went out into the garden and stood leaning on the gate staring at the sea.</p>
			<p>Her father had died at nine o’clock that morning, and it was now twelve. The sun beat on her bare head; and the burnt-up grass along the top of the cliff, and the dusty road that passed the gate, and the glittering sea, and the few white clouds hanging in the sky, all blazed and glared in an extremity of silent, motionless heat and light.</p>
			<p>Into this emptiness Lucy stared, motionless herself, as if she had been carved in stone. There was not a sail on the sea, nor a line of distant smoke from any steamer, neither was there once the flash of a bird’s wing brushing across the sky. Movement seemed smitten rigid. Sound seemed to have gone to sleep.</p>
			<p>Lucy stood staring at the sea, her face as empty of expression as the bright blank world before her. Her father had been dead three hours, and she felt nothing.</p>
			<p>It was just a week since they had arrived in Cornwall, she and he, full of hope, full of pleasure in the pretty little furnished house they had taken for August and September, full of confidence in the good the pure air was going to do him. But there had always been confidence; there had never been a moment during the long years of his fragility when confidence had even been questioned. He was delicate, and she had taken care of him. She had taken care of him and he had been delicate ever since she could remember. And ever since she could remember he had been everything in life to her. She had had no thought since she grew up for anybody but her father. There was no room for any other thought, so completely did he fill her heart. They had done everything together, shared everything together, dodged the winters together, settled in charming places, seen the same beautiful things, read the same books, talked, laughed, had friends⁠—heaps of friends; wherever they were her father seemed at once to have friends, adding them to the mass he had already. She had not been away from him a day for years; she had had no wish to go away. Where and with whom could she be so happy as with him? All the years were years of sunshine. There had been no winters; nothing but summer, summer, and sweet scents and soft skies, and patient understanding with her slowness⁠—for he had the nimblest mind⁠—and love. He was the most amusing companion to her, the most generous friend, the most illuminating guide, the most adoring father; and now he was dead, and she felt nothing.</p>
			<p>Her father. Dead. For ever.</p>
			<p>She said the words over to herself. They meant nothing.</p>
			<p>She was going to be alone. Without him. Always.</p>
			<p>She said the words over to herself. They meant nothing.</p>
			<p>Up in that room with its windows wide open, shut away from her with the two village women, he was lying dead. He had smiled at her for the last time, said all he was ever going to say to her, called her the last of the sweet, half-teasing names he loved to invent for her. Why, only a few hours ago they were having breakfast together and planning what they would do that day. Why, only yesterday they drove together after tea towards the sunset, and he had seen, with his quick eyes that saw everything, some unusual grasses by the road-side, and had stopped and gathered them, excited to find such rare ones, and had taken them back with him to study, and had explained them to her and made her see profoundly interesting, important things in them, in these grasses which, till he touched them, had seemed just grasses. That is what he did with everything⁠—touched it into life and delight. The grasses lay in the dining-room now, waiting for him to work on them, spread out where he had put them on some blotting-paper in the window. She had seen them as she came through on her way to the garden; and she had seen, too, that the breakfast was still there, the breakfast they had had together, still as they had left it, forgotten by the servants in the surprise of death. He had fallen down as he got up from it. Dead. In an instant. No time for anything, for a cry, for a look. Gone. Finished. Wiped out.</p>
			<p>What a beautiful day it was; and so hot. He loved heat. They were lucky in the weather.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Yes, there were sounds after all⁠—she suddenly noticed them; sounds from the room upstairs, a busy moving about of discreet footsteps, the splash of water, crockery being carefully set down. Presently the women would come and tell her everything was ready, and she could go back to him again. The women had tried to comfort her when they arrived; and so had the servants, and so had the doctor. Comfort her! And she felt nothing.</p>
			<p>Lucy stared at the sea, thinking these things, examining the situation as a curious one but unconnected with herself, looking at it with a kind of cold comprehension. Her mind was quite clear. Every detail of what had happened was sharply before her. She knew everything, and she felt nothing⁠—like God, she said to herself; yes, exactly like God.</p>
			<p>Footsteps came along the road, which was hidden by the garden’s fringe of trees and bushes for fifty yards on either side of the gate, and presently a man passed between her eyes and the sea. She did not notice him, for she was noticing nothing but her thoughts, and he passed in front of her quite close, and was gone.</p>
			<p>But he had seen her, and had stared hard at her for the brief instant it took to pass the gate. Her face and its expression had surprised him. He was not a very observant man, and at that moment was even less so than usual, for he was particularly and deeply absorbed in his own affairs; yet when he came suddenly on the motionless figure at the gate, with its wide-open eyes that simply looked through him as he went by, unconscious, obviously, that any one was going by, his attention was surprised away from himself and almost he had stopped to examine the strange creature more closely. His code, however, prevented that, and he continued along the further fifty yards of bushes and trees that hid the other half of the garden from the road, but more slowly, slower and slower, till at the end of the garden where the road left it behind and went on very solitarily over the bare grass on the top of the cliffs, winding in and out with the ins and outs of the coast for as far as one could see, he hesitated, looked back, went on a yard or two, hesitated again, stopped and took off his hot hat and wiped his forehead, looked at the bare country and the long twisting glare of the road ahead, and then very slowly turned and went past the belt of bushes towards the gate again.</p>
			<p>He said to himself as he went: “My God, I’m so lonely. I can’t stand it. I must speak to some one. I shall go off my head⁠—”</p>
			<p>For what had happened to this man⁠—his name was Wemyss⁠—was that public opinion was forcing him into retirement and inactivity at the very time when he most needed company and distraction. He had to go away by himself, he had to withdraw for at the very least a week from his ordinary life, from his house on the river where he had just begun his summer holiday, from his house in London where at least there were his clubs, because of this determination on the part of public opinion that he should for a space be alone with his sorrow. Alone with sorrow⁠—of all ghastly things for a man to be alone with! It was an outrage, he felt, to condemn a man to that; it was the cruellest form of solitary confinement. He had come to Cornwall because it took a long time to get to, a whole day in the train there and a whole day in the train back, clipping the week, the minimum of time public opinion insisted on for respecting his bereavement, at both ends; but still that left five days of awful loneliness, of wandering about the cliffs by himself trying not to think, without a soul to speak to, without a thing to do. He couldn’t play bridge because of public opinion. Everybody knew what had happened to him. It had been in all the papers. The moment he said his name they would know. It was so recent. Only last week.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>No, he couldn’t bear this, he must speak to some one. That girl⁠—with those strange eyes she wasn’t just ordinary. She wouldn’t mind letting him talk to her for a little, perhaps sit in the garden with her a little. She would understand.</p>
			<p>Wemyss was like a child in his misery. He very nearly cried outright when he got to the gate and took off his hat, and the girl looked at him blankly just as if she still didn’t see him and hadn’t heard him when he said, “Could you let me have a glass of water? I⁠—it’s so hot⁠—”</p>
			<p>He began to stammer because of her eyes. “I⁠—I’m horribly thirsty⁠—the heat⁠—”</p>
			<p>He pulled out his handkerchief and mopped his forehead. He certainly looked very hot. His face was red and distressed, and his forehead dripped. He was all puckered, like an unhappy baby. And the girl looked so cool, so bloodlessly cool. Her hands, folded on the top bar of the gate, looked more than cool, they looked cold; like hands in winter, shrunk and small with cold. She had bobbed hair, he noticed, so that it was impossible to tell how old she was, brown hair from which the sun was beating out bright lights; and her small face had no colour except those wide eyes fixed on his and the colour of her rather big mouth; but even her mouth seemed frozen.</p>
			<p>“Would it be much bother⁠—” began Wemyss again; and then his situation overwhelmed him.</p>
			<p>“You would be doing a greater kindness than you know,” he said, his voice trembling with unhappiness, “if you would let me come into the garden a minute and rest.”</p>
			<p>At the sound of the genuine wretchedness in his voice Lucy’s blank eyes became a little human. It got through to her consciousness that this distressed warm stranger was appealing to her for something.</p>
			<p>“Are you so hot?” she asked, really seeing him for the first time.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I’m hot,” said Wemyss. “But it isn’t that. I’ve had a misfortune⁠—a terrible misfortune⁠—”</p>
			<p>He paused, overcome by the remembrance of it, by the unfairness of so much horror having overtaken him.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m sorry,” said Lucy vaguely, still miles away from him, deep in indifference. “Have you lost anything?”</p>
			<p>“Good God, not that sort of misfortune!” cried Wemyss. “Let me come in a minute⁠—into the garden a minute⁠—just to sit a minute with a human being. You would be doing a great kindness. Because you’re a stranger I can talk to you about it if you’ll let me. Just because we’re strangers I could talk. I haven’t spoken to a soul but servants and official people since⁠—since it happened. For two days I haven’t spoken at all to a living soul⁠—I shall go mad⁠—”</p>
			<p>His voice shook again with his unhappiness, with his astonishment at his unhappiness.</p>
			<p>Lucy didn’t think two days very long not to speak to anybody in, but there was something overwhelming about the strange man’s evident affliction that roused her out of her apathy; not much⁠—she was still profoundly detached, observing from another world, as it were, this extreme heat and agitation, but at least she saw him now, she did with a faint curiosity consider him. He was like some elemental force in his directness. He had the quality of an irresistible natural phenomenon. But she did not move from her position at the gate, and her eyes continued, with the unwaveringness he thought so odd, to stare into his.</p>
			<p>“I would gladly have let you come in,” she said, “if you had come yesterday, but to-day my father died.”</p>
			<p>Wemyss looked at her in astonishment. She had said it in as level and ordinary a voice as if she had been remarking, rather indifferently, on the weather.</p>
			<p>Then he had a moment of insight. His own calamity had illuminated him. He who had never known pain, who had never let himself be worried, who had never let himself be approached in his life by a doubt, had for the last week lived in an atmosphere of worry and pain, and of what, if he allowed himself to think, to become morbid, might well grow into a most unfair, tormenting doubt. He understood, as he would not have understood a week ago, what her whole attitude, her rigidity meant. He stared at her a moment while she stared straight back at him, and then his big warm hands dropped on to the cold ones folded on the top bar of the gate, and he said, holding them firmly though they made no attempt to move, “So that’s it. So that’s why. Now I know.”</p>
			<p>And then he added, with the simplicity his own situation was putting into everything he did, “That settles it. We two stricken ones must talk together.”</p>
			<p>And still covering her hands with one of his, with the other he unlatched the gate and walked in.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
